---
title: Site redesign complete
date: 2018-07-20 14:50 -0400
tags: [news, meta]
---

Wow.

I remember, in the fall of junior year, sitting down in Klein's English Lit
class and learning Jekyll and sketching this site out in a few days. Up until now, it hadn't
really been touched or used since, except to upload lectures for Computer Team. It
was time for an overhaul.

After years of neglect and then months of occasional effort, I can officially
say that this site is back online! I've replaced all my custom layouts with
select pieces of Bootstrap 4, which I've become really familiar with over the
past year or so&mdash;it just makes my life easier and allows me to use
relatively sophisicated components (like tabs, buttons, etc.) with reasonable
styles right out of the box. However, I added the Bootstrap SCSS in myself and
overrode a number of default variables for things like colors and fonts, so the
overall look-and-feel of the site is pretty consistent with what I had originally.

I also totally redesigned the home page so that it can function as a kind of
overview of my resume and technical and academic qualifications. I've enjoyed
having a fair amount of useful information up on the site, so that I can easily share
information about me with people I need to talk to. It makes introductions much smoother!
Recently, I heard from somebody that I was meeting for the first time that
they'd Googled me beforehand and this site had come up, so I guess it's doing its
job. It's also really exciting to be slowly phasing out the information
about what I did in high school to make room for what I'll eventually be doing
at Harvard!

Finally, I've been working on something that I've wanted to do for a really long
time&mdash;having the ability to write meaningful album reviews. I'm not sure
if anyone will actually read them, but I've always had this yearning for sharing
my thoughts on the arts, and music especially, with other people, or at least
forcing myself to put my thoughts into words, so hopefully I'll be able to do that.
It took me a day or two to figure out how to implement a kind of polymorphism
in Jekyll that I was happy with for having "album review posts" as a kind of
subtype of "blog post;" in the end, I created an `album` category that
is designated in `_config.yml` to render with the `album` layout, which is an
extension of the default `blog` layout that adds in some additional
information about the album in a small sidebar and the functionality to actually
listen to the album on YouTube or Spotify. Check out a working example
<a href="/albums/2018/07/20/discovery.html">here</a>.

Aside from this blog, my actual summer has been going swimmingly. In the mornings, mostly, I've been
grading problem sets for the folks over at the <a href="http://aops.com">
Art of Problem Solving</a> to earn some spending money for college; I find the grading
sometimes very stimulating and sometimes very repetitive, as one might expect.
Aside from that, I've made gigantic progress on SilverChips Online. We hope
to put a live beta site up very soon, and then my involvement will start winding
down. After it's up, I'm planning to devote another post to the technical issues
I've had to solve after all these years&mdash;maybe somebody will find one of my
workarounds as useful as I've found some random blogs and websites to be when
building Django applications. I also just finished *The Gods Themselves* by Asimov
and *The Illustrated Man* by Bradbury, both of which I loved. Someday, I'll hopefully
add in literature reviews to the site as well!

I'm glad that the site is up to date, and I hope that I'll be able to use it more actively to write down my
thoughts about a variety of topics, especially while I'm at home all summer
getting reading to go to college at the end of August!
