---
title: Reflections on Fall 2019
date: 2020-01-21 5:34 -0500
tags: [activity-log]
---
*I tend to forget things I've done very quickly, so I'd like to start writing recaps of my activities over the semester and over breaks as a kind of diary. Hopefully this post is the first of many! There might also be some retrospectives someday.*

## Residential life

The source of the largest changes in my life between last year and this semester has been living in the house system. Every spring on "Housing Day", the university randomly places groups of first-year students in one of twelve houses to live in for the next three years. I live in Pforzheimer House ("Pfoho"), which is in "The Quad", a group of three houses that are about a mile northwest from Harvard Yard, the center of gravity on campus. The trek to the Yard for classes (and meeting with anybody who doesn't live in the Quad) can feel pretty long, especially on cold and windy days; in fact, it is pretty commonplace to hear about students crying when they learn they will spend their next three years in the Quad ("getting quadded").[^allston]

However, there are several things that make living in the Quad really enjoyable. Pfoho has a number of beautiful pianos, and being able to play them has been a great incentive to begin practicing again. The sense of community is really strong, and it's nice to always know a large fraction of people in the dining hall every night. (The other Houses institute weekly "Community Nights" where they only allow their own students to dine in order to emulate what we have naturally every night in the Quad!) We have a nice gym, and it is a big plus to not have to go outside to get there. Overall, the neighborhood is more residential and peaceful than the rest of campus, and walking to and from the Quad given nice weather and sufficient time can be very charming. And I can easily head to Target to restock on soda, yogurt, cereal, nuts, and ice cream, my dorm-room culinary mainstays 😅.

{% include image.html src="posts/moors_hall.jpeg" caption="Moors Hall, the wing of Pfoho that I live in this year, on a particularly nice day." %}

This semester has been a pretty big step forward for me in terms of building and maintaining solid friendships. I'm pretty lucky that a number of close friends ended up in the Quad (although maybe this is some selection bias). I live in a single this year, which can often be a bit lonely, but I spend a good amount of time chilling or working with friends around the house, and regularly can find people to eat with (not the case last year in Annenberg, the huge first-year dining hall). We watched a lot of TV and YouTube in our downtime, including SNL, Rick and Marty, and Silicon Valley. Pfoho also has a number of nice events for socializing. Before school started, the sophomore class went on an inaugural "Camp Pfoho" icebreaker outing, where we rented out a YMCA camp and met each other through games, arts-and-crafts, and canoeing. Later in the semester, I learned Chopin's Nocturne Op. 9 No. 2, and I performed it along with the No. 1 (which I had learned in high school) on one of the aforementioned gorgeous pianos for several friends at a Pfoho "Music Matinee" event; it was really rewarding to be able to play for people that I care about and also hear some of the crazy talents some others in the House have! (We heard a Bach cello suite, homegrown rap, and a trumpet cover of *Oblivion*, an Argentinian movie love song.) I'm also working on a Mozart Sonata and a Debussy Prelude, and I hope to organize a little recital in the spring.

{% include image.html src="posts/sunset_lake.jpeg" caption="A gorgeous sunset over the lake at YMCA Camp Frank A. Day, capping off a great day at Camp Pfoho." %}

## Teaching

This semester, I was a TF for CS 121, our undergraduate CS theory class. The class had a number of unique challenges from a pedagogical perspective. It is essentially required for CS majors and is relatively large (~200 students). The problem sets and exams for the class consist almost entirely of questions requiring students to prove mathematical theorems. For many CS students, it's the only first or second exposure they have to this type of class; many other CS classes at Harvard focus on programming and are more project-based. And logistically, communicating between course staff and the students was often very difficult, and the volume of discussion on our online forum made it very easy for high-quality questions and answers to get lost. Some homework problems would require specific proof methods that might be completely non-obvious to someone without prior exposure or intimate knowledge of the encyclopedic textbook.

All that being said, I'm really proud of the work that we did this semester. By the end of the semester, there was a lot of camaraderie among the TFs (there were about 15 of us), and I was lucky to hear a lot from them and from the students about effective ways of teaching and including people. I had several different avenues of interaction with the students: I hosted weekly office hours,[^oh] ran a seminar-style discussion section with guest lecturers for advanced students (see [my scribe notes](/papers/cs_121_5_2019.pdf)), and volunteered to tutor students who struggled on exams. Through all this, I was able to see a kind of cross-section of the students in the class, and that has contributed in a number of ways to my thoughts on equity and achievement in the department.

## Classes

Overall, I tried to branch out this past semester in terms of classes.

- I took an awesome class called *Contemporary Spanish Literature*. We started out by talking about some early contemporary works such as Romantic poetry and legends, which are pretty screwed up by today's standards (a lot of men idolizing the "unattainable/untouchable woman"). We also talked about the Spanish civil war and fascism, the conflict between regional and national identities, immigration, technology, and gender. This was my first real foray into academic writing in another language, and I was pleasantly surprised by the results. We also connected a lot of the written works to art and film, which helped give a broader perspective on the movements and periods which we studied.

- I also took a physics class, *Quantum Mechanics I*. My original aim in this class was to see practical motivations for some of the math I've been exposed to, such as representation theory; I'm not sure how much closer I came to that goal, but the material was fascinating in its own right, we had a fabulous professor, and I'm glad to be more conversant in this arena since several of my closest friends study physics. Another class of mine was a math class called *Measure, Integration, and Functional Analysis*; learning about Hilbert spaces, Fourier analysis, and a bit of operator theory and PDEs serendipitously did end up being closely tied to the physics we did.

- Finally, I took two CS classes, *Systems Security* and *Advanced Machine Learning*. *Systems Security* was a great class with really fun projects that were throwbacks to the exploitation and reverse engineering problems in the CTF cybersecurity competitions we used to participate in in high school (although I personally never learned how to solve them). We had one project on buffer overflows, another project on reverse engineering, and a final one on network attacks like TCP resets. *Machine Learning* was sometimes a bit all over the place — it was the instructors' first time teaching the class, and I think it will definitely be improved in the future — but I learned for the first time about notions in ML theory like PAC-learning and the VC-dimension, and it was also pretty interesting to hear about neural architectures like CNNs and seq2seq models and techniques like attention.

## Research

Since this past summer's internship, my thinking has been trending heavily towards research and graduate school. Toward that end, this semester, I regularly attended weekly meetings of a machine learning theory reading group, the department's CS theory guest-speaker seminar, and the theory grad students' discussion group. I'm also getting involved with two specific projects (one on understanding neural network optimization and one on communication complexity) that will hopefully result in some concrete research experience. Finally, in my CS classes, I completed two open-ended course projects; in *Systems Security*, we wrote a paper on in-memory data structure forensics, and in *Machine Learning*, I implemented models and ran experiments for a project on transfer learning in the deep reinforcement setting.

<br/>
<hr/>

[^allston]: I am concerned that it will be even tougher next year because the CS department is relocating across the Charles to Allston, about a mile south of Harvard Yard (but hopefully it will work out with shuttles and class schedules, and the new facility seems awesome).
[^oh]: Lest I forget, they were 9PM-11PM in a Maxwell-Dworkin classroom, and my OH partner was Will, who was the best partner one could possibly ask for.