---
  title: "Avicii's *True*, and the end of an EDM era"
  date: 2018-08-07 11:21 -0400
  category: albums
  tags: [progressive-house, avicii, folktronica]

  album:
    name: "True"
    artist: Avicii
    year: 2013
    label: PRMD
    genre: Progressive house, folktronica
    length: "48:37"
    image: true.png

    listen:
      youtube:
        id: "PLwqbQsYPIW2vaTjdMyEqIg67RwGchi2U9"
        playlist: true
      spotify:
        id: "1s9tU91VJt4sU5owi29GD3"
---
*True* was Avicii's first studio album, and it's awesome because it mixes
electronic dance sounds (mostly progressive house) with influences from genres
like bluegrass and country in a very nontrivial way. (His later work starts to incorporate reggae, hip hop,
you name it. It's great.) The result is a really refreshing and positive
take on dance music; it's danceable but also resonates really deeply. Avicii's
music is wonderful because of the youthfulness and joie de vivre he somehow
packs into even his more mellow songs. Every Avicii track sounds genuine.

You might remember hits like "Wake Me Up" and "Hey Brother," which hit #4 and
#16 on the *Billboard* Hot 100, respectively; they both serve as good examples
of how the cross-genre appeal of Avicii's sound allowed him to produce chart-
climbing tracks that are still based squarely in EDM, and progressive house
in particular &mdash; unlike many other artists who simply adapted elements
of EDM into more mainstream pop styles.

The less "mainstream" tracks on this album deserve a shout-out, too.
"You Make Me" is amazingly bubbly and playful; the voice is so high it's almost
silly, and the track is just all-around feel good. "Shame On Me" has one of the
most technically intricate and compelling drops I've ever heard, and somehow it
achieves that while being an electronic bluegrass song; "Dear Boy" is interestingly
dubsteppy; "Heart On My Sleeve" is fully instrumental and sounds both
like Daft Punk's Tron soundtrack and a gorgeous, sentimental country song; and
"All You Need Is Love" (which is only a bonus track on the album's Japanese edition)
is one of the single most exuberant dance songs I've ever heard.

Also, while we're on the topic, I'd like to recommend listening to some of the other great Avicii
singles from around *True*'s period and earlier, like "Seek Bromance," "I Could
Be The One,""
"My Feelings For You" (which makes epic use of vocal samples from Cassius' 1999
"Feelings for You), and of course, the unstoppable progressive house masterpiece "Levels."

On a personal note, Avicii recently committed suicide; he was only 28, and it was
really tragic, not only for the dance community as a whole, which lost a visionary DJ, but
for many individuals like me and many of my close friends in high school, for
whom Avicii's music was an enduring positive influence. We can only hope that
future generations of producers carry on his legacy of crafting inspiring and
feel-good dance music.
